---
layout: post
title:  "Projects"
date:   2017-02-04
categories: articles
---

<h1>Projects</h1>

<h3>Over the years Katkatha has grown organically to expand the possibilities of using puppetry by looking at applied puppetry and exploring multiple collaborative projects both in India and abroad. What is applied puppetry? In short, it is the exploration of the art form beyond its entertainment value, in fields like education, advocacy, awareness building, initiating discussion on socio-political issues and aiding in therapy.</h3> 

<h2>Community and Peacebuilding Projects –</h2>

<h3>Peace building</h3>

<h4>Kashmir Project (2006). Supported by WISCOMP, this project took place in Kashmir, in the village of Beejbehara, near Srinagar where 25 young women aged of 18-25 worked with team Katkatha using masks and puppets and writer B.Gauri for 7 months to explore personal stories of growing up and living in Kashmir through the conflict years and the poetry of sufi poetess Lal Ded (whose shrine lies in Beejbehara) . The process culminated in a show by team Katkatha, scripted by B Gauri and titled Kashmir Project which premiered in 2007.</h4> 

Watch <i>Kashmir Project Part 1</i> <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-WlcuAPg700" target="_blank">here</a>.

Watch <i>Kashmir Project Part 2</i> <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2FOG4OFGXyA" target="_blank">here</a>.

<h3>Community and health</h3>

<h4>CREA project performance - Mujhe bhi Gino (2009). This roadshow with a difference included 20 young women from Jharkhand and UP who travelled with team Katkatha on the back of a truck to use giant puppet heads and puppets at public spaces, like market places and village sqares, to celebrate and tell the story of local women achievers and to enable their own communities to look at women with a different lenses. 

Community Health Project in collaboration with World Bank, CHEALSEA and Make Arts/Stop AIDS. An HIV/AIDS awareness program that ran for over 8 years and spanned 5 states of India included the play Virus ka tamasha.</h4> 

Watch <i>Virus ka Tamasha </i> <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dJcjEX0hCQA" target="_blank">here</a> 

<h4>...that performed over 150 shows, a project called Khel-Khel Mein (Video to be edited) with teenagers from 5 statesof India, who had been infected or affected by HIV or AIDS. The group made a puppet performance for their peer group based on their own stories and ICTC material and these were  replicated in 2000 Do-it-yourself puppet kits distributed by NACO across 5 states of India.</h4> 

Workshop with the juvenile remand home, collaboration with the NGOs, Prayas and STEP. 

<h3>Community and Gender Project</h3>

<h4>A performance called Gender Tamasha was created with the support of Pravah (2013) The show explored the idea of safe spaces for women at work, on the streets and at home. Using giant puppet heads these non-verbal pieces explored the everyday gender realities of India asking people to stop oppression based on gender by speaking up. The project is still running online as the MustBol campaign.</h4>

Watch <i>Office</i> <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9Vfu1XxfaI4" target="_blank">here</a>.


Watch <i>Bus Stop</i> <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pgNx8A63Kyo" target="_blank">here</a>.

<h2>School Projects –</h2>

<h3>For the founding members of Katkatha the love for puppetry began in school. Thus our focus on schools and school children and teachers has always been strong. Puppets are not just a form of entertainment for children but to make your own puppet, manipulate it on stage, to write the script for a puppet play or design lights and sound can be a life altering experience for children. For a teacher, puppets can be the key to opening a world of possibilities for her students enabling them to learn in multiple ways. The arts change lives and world view. We believe in this very passionately at Katkatha.</h3>

<h3>-	Productions by school children- Jenna and Garbar Chacha, Wingless, Wizard of Oz, Panjarsala, Momotaro - Annual Plays with 128 children for Cambridge Primary School annually from 2008 to 2017.</h3> 

<h3>-	Week long Puppet Workshop with 240 children in Neerja Modi School which culminated in a giant puppet parade (2008).</h3>

<h3>-	Tibetan teachers and children workshop organized by Govt-in-Exile at Mcleodganj in Dharamshala (September,2009).</h3> 

<h3>-	Two months Project with Ryan International School to create a giant puppet show called the World is My Playground as an opening act for the Intl. Children Theatre Festival (October, 2011) in Delhi and in Mumbai in 2012.</h3> 

<h3>-	Annual event- Teachers' Symposium -</h3>

<h4>Since 2013 this day long program is aimed at teachers of Pre-primary and Primary schools, with a focus of helping them use puppets in the classroom. Over the years the workshops have covered Shadow puppets, Material Theatre, Glove puppets and paper theatre.</h4>

<h3>-	World War I Centenary- Puppetry and History Project</h3> 

<h4>-	World War I Centenary- Puppetry and History Project in collboration with Le Tas de Sable in Amiens, France. In 2014 Le Tas Sable began a unique project for children and youth that has since spanned 15 countries, across four continents. Katkatha was the Indian partner in this International program. Two schools, namely Vasant Valley and Shiv Nadar became project partners from 2014-15 and 2017-18 respectively. The first part was themed “Objects: what soldiers did when they were waiting” and the second was based on the theme of “Exiles”. The children were guided through three stages in both projects  . First, an introduction to WWI followed by a research of the role and condition of Indian soldiers in the war. Second, an introduction to puppet theatre with a special focus on Bunraku and Shadow Puppets. Third, a performance improvised, scripted and created by the children themselves that travelled to Amiens in France in 2015 and 2018.</h4> 


<h2>International Projects –</h2>

<h3>Freida Leon, collaborated to create a performance "The Swiss Box"  (September, 2011) supported by Pro Helvetia.</h3>

<h3>WW1 project in France with Vasant Valley and Shiv Nadar School</h3>
  
<h4>Katkatha collaborated from 2013-2019 with the French puppetry group ‘Le Tas de Sable Ches Panses Vertes’at a project, looking at a century of WWI. The team worked with two Delhi schools, Vasant Valley and Shiv Nadar for two years each. The purpose was to look at the impacts of war, most notably through the concept of exiles, or refugees.

During the meetings, children were oriented to puppetry and the themes of the First World War through a brief research of the situation of the Indian soldiers participating in World War I, which was conducted by reading letters of the soldiers and replying to them, and building models of the trenches.

In Shiv Nadar each child collected a personal story of exile from a neighbour or their own family. They discovered that Delhi is a city of refugees. Almost every person in Delhi came from somewhere else. Many came from Pakistan or Bangladesh when the country was partitioned, many from Kashmir who fled during the conflict. These families carried many memories. All of these came together in stories and poems, bound together by the central idea of enforced homelessness.</h4> Some examples of the work done may be found [here](http://objetsguerresetpaix.com/groupes-groups/shiv-nadar-school-india/).

<h4>The performance creations of both schools then travelled to Amiens, France, to stage their play in 2015 and 2018.</h4>
  
<br>

<h3>Barbara Kölling Mentorship-(2017)</h3> 

<h4>Barbara Kölling, the co-founder and director of Helios Theatre in Hamm works with material theatre with a special focus on toddlers. In 2016-17 she spent two sessions mentoring eight theatre groups from across India. These were Tadpole Repertory Theater from, Plus One, Team Gunjan and Dhruv, Yellow Cat and Katkatha’s own team from Delhi, Gillo Theatre and Tram Arts Trust from Mumbai and Ihab Talameh from Palestine. By the end of the 7 weeks each group performed for children aged 3-6 years of age many times. Some of these shows continue to perform and tour!</h4>

<br>

<h3>Collaboration with Setagaya Silk for Bamboo Princess (2018-19). Japan Foundation.-</h3> 

<h4>In 2018-19 an Indo-Japanese experience unfolded between Katkatha members at Savitri Villa in Mussoorie. Avinash Kumar(dancer), Mohammad Shameem (puppeteer and puppet maker) and Anurupa Roy (director) with Kimi Takei(dancer), Ken Oishi (actor), Keita (String puppeteer) and Honoh Horikawa (Director) spent 20 days creating their version of the Japanese folktale called The Bamboo Princess. Told with watermark shadows on an OHP, dance, masks, string and rod puppets the show bridged two cultures and ways of working.</h4>

<br>

<h3>Rajasthan water project (2018)- University of West england, Bristol UK-</h3>

<h4>The project was focused on water conservation in Jhunjhunu dist. of Rajasthan, where pipeline water brought to homes has led to the breakdown of traditional systems of preserving water. The project worked with a group of school children aged 7-15 years at the local school in Chirawa, Jhunjhunu. The project was called “water detectives” and the children collected folklore, stories, songs etc. about water from their grandparents, parents, village elders etc. and turned them into shadow puppets and paper cut installations.</h4> 

<br>

<h3>2020- January to March. Mentorship by Sylvie Baillion, Director of Le Tas de Sable Ches Panses Vertes.</h3>

<h4>Sylvie will mentor a collaboration between groups that work with puppets or materials and professional writers. Attended by five companies namely Ishara Puppet Theatre Trust with writer, Gillo Repertory, Un-Lock, and three members of Katkatha.</h4>
